PRODUCTION.md, before:

# Switching to Production Mode

This guide explains how to switch from Plaid's **Sandbox** (test data) to **Production** (real bank accounts).

## 📋 Prerequisites

Before switching to production, you need:

1. ✅ A Plaid account with **Production Access** approved
2. ✅ Production API credentials from Plaid
3. ✅ Your application tested thoroughly in Sandbox mode

---

## 🚦 Understanding Plaid Environments

Plaid has three environments:

### 1. **Sandbox** (Testing)
- ✅ Free, unlimited usage
- ✅ Fake banks and test credentials
- ✅ Instant setup, no approval needed
- ❌ No real bank connections
- **Best for:** Development and testing

### 2. **Development** (Limited Real Data)
- ✅ Connect real bank accounts
- ✅ Real transaction data
- ❌ Limited to 100 Items (bank connections)
- ❌ Requires Plaid approval
- **Best for:** Testing with real accounts before production

### 3. **Production** (Full Real Data)
- ✅ Unlimited real bank connections
- ✅ Full production features
- ❌ Requires Plaid compliance approval
- ❌ May have costs depending on usage
- **Best for:** Live application with real users

---

## 🔑 Step 1: Request Production Access from Plaid

### A. Go to Plaid Dashboard

1. Log in to https://dashboard.plaid.com
2. Go to **Team Settings** → **Keys**

### B. Request Production Access

1. You'll see a "Request Production Access" section at the top
2. Click **"Start Application"** or **"Request Production Access"**

### C. Complete the Application

You'll need to provide:

- **Company Information:**
  - Company name and website
  - Business description
  - Expected user volume

- **Use Case Details:**
  - How you'll use Plaid (expense tracking)
  - Which Plaid products (Transactions)
  - User consent and privacy policy

- **Security & Compliance:**
  - Data security measures
  - How you protect user data
  - Compliance with regulations

- **Technical Details:**
  - Your application URL (e.g., http://ha.ggg:3000)
  - OAuth redirect URIs
  - Webhook endpoints (optional)

### D. Wait for Approval

- ⏱️ Review typically takes **1-2 business days**
- 📧 You'll receive an email when approved
- ✅ Production credentials will appear in your dashboard

---

## 🔑 Step 2: Get Production Credentials

Once approved:

1. Go to **Team Settings** → **Keys** in Plaid Dashboard
2. You'll now see **three sets** of credentials:
   - Sandbox (yellow)
   - Development (blue)
   - Production (green) ✅

3. Copy your **Production** credentials:
   - `client_id` (same for all environments)
   - `production` secret (different from sandbox secret)

---

## 🔄 Step 2.5: Enable Transactions Refresh Product (Required for Full History)

**IMPORTANT:** To fetch full transaction history (7+ years for Amex, 2+ years for other banks), you need the **Transactions Refresh** product enabled.

### What is Transactions Refresh?

- The standard `Transactions` product only returns data **Plaid has already cached** (typically 90 days from when you first link an account)
- The `Transactions Refresh` product allows you to **trigger Plaid to fetch fresh historical data** from the institution
- Without it, you'll be limited to ~3 months of transactions, even when requesting older dates

### How to Enable Transactions Refresh

1. Go to https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products
2. Look for the **"Transactions"** product
3. Ensure **"Transactions Refresh"** is enabled
4. If you don't see this option or it's disabled:
   - Click **"Request Access"** or **"Enable"**
   - Contact Plaid Support if you can't enable it yourself
   - Some Plaid tiers may require an upgrade to access this feature

### What Happens Without Transactions Refresh?

If you don't have this product enabled:
- ❌ You'll see `INVALID_PRODUCT` errors when trying to backfill history
- ❌ The "Backfill All History" button will only return ~90 days of transactions
- ❌ You won't be able to fetch years of historical data from institutions
- ✅ You can still use the app, but with limited transaction history
- ✅ You can use the **Copilot CSV Import** feature as a workaround

### Verification

After enabling, you should be able to:
- Click "Backfill All History" without errors
- Fetch 7+ years of American Express transactions
- Fetch 2+ years of transactions from most other banks

---

## ⚙️ Step 3: Update Your Configuration

### Option A: Update config.json (Recommended)

Edit your `config.json` file:

```json
{
  "google_sheet_id": "your-sheet-id",
  "plaid_client_id": "your-plaid-client-id",
  "plaid_secret": "your-PRODUCTION-secret-here",
  "plaid_env": "production"
}
```

**Important Changes:**
- Change `plaid_secret` to your **production** secret
- Change `plaid_env` from `"sandbox"` to `"production"`

### Option B: Use Environment Variables

Set these environment variables:

```bash
export PLAID_CLIENT_ID="your-plaid-client-id"
export PLAID_SECRET="your-production-secret"
export PLAID_ENV="production"
```

---

## 🔄 Step 4: Restart the Server

After updating the configuration:

```bash
# Stop the current server (Ctrl+C)

# Start it again
npm start
```

The server will now use **production** mode!

---

## ✅ Step 5: Verify Production Mode

### In the Web UI:

1. Open http://localhost:3000
2. Look at the sidebar footer
3. You should see: **Environment: PRODUCTION** (green badge)
4. If you see **SANDBOX** (yellow badge), check your config

### Test a Real Bank Connection:

1. Click **"Link Account"** in the UI
2. Click **"Link Bank Account"**
3. Search for **your real bank** (e.g., "Chase", "Bank of America")
4. Use your **real online banking credentials**
5. Complete the authentication flow

✅ Your real account should now be connected!

---

## 🧪 Step 6: Test Production Sync

### Sync Transactions:

1. In the dashboard, click **"Sync Transactions"** button
2. Wait for the sync to complete
3. You should see **real transactions** from your bank account

### Verify Data:

1. Go to **Transactions** page
2. You should see your real purchases, income, etc.
3. Check **Accounts** page for accurate balances
4. Open your Google Sheet to verify data is saved

---

## 🔒 Security Best Practices for Production

### 1. Protect Your Secrets

❌ **NEVER** commit `config.json` to git (already in `.gitignore`)

```bash
# Verify it's ignored:
git status

# Should NOT show config.json
```

### 2. Use HTTPS in Production

When deploying to a server (not localhost):

- Use HTTPS (not HTTP)
- Get SSL certificate (Let's Encrypt is free)
- Update Plaid redirect URIs to https://

### 3. Set Up Webhooks (Optional but Recommended)

Plaid can notify you when:
- A user needs to re-authenticate
- An account has errors
- New transactions are available

Set up in: **Plaid Dashboard** → **Webhooks**

### 4. Monitor API Usage

- Check **Plaid Dashboard** → **Activity** regularly
- Set up usage alerts
- Review API errors and fix issues

### 5. Handle Re-authentication

Banks sometimes require users to re-login. Implement:
- Error handling for `ITEM_LOGIN_REQUIRED`
- UI to prompt users to re-link
- Use Plaid Link in "update mode"

---

## 🔄 Switching Back to Sandbox

To switch back to testing mode:

### Edit config.json:

```json
{
  "plaid_env": "sandbox",
  "plaid_secret": "your-sandbox-secret"
}
```

### Restart server:

```bash
npm start
```

---

## 🆘 Troubleshooting Production Issues

### "INVALID_PRODUCT: client is not authorized to access transactions_refresh" error

**Cause:** Your Plaid account doesn't have the Transactions Refresh product enabled

**Fix:**
1. Go to https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products
2. Enable **"Transactions Refresh"** under the Transactions product
3. If you can't enable it, click "Request Access" or contact Plaid Support
4. Wait for approval (usually instant if your account tier supports it)
5. The "Backfill All History" button will then work to fetch full historical data

**Workaround if unavailable:**
- Use the **Copilot CSV Import** feature to import historical transactions
- Export data from your bank/credit card website and import via the app

### "Invalid credentials" error

**Cause:** Using sandbox secret in production mode

**Fix:**
- Copy the **production** secret from Plaid Dashboard
- Update `config.json` with production secret
- Restart server

### "Item login required" error

**Cause:** Bank requires re-authentication

**Fix:**
- Ask user to re-link their account
- Use Plaid Link in update mode (advanced)

### "Institution not available" error

**Cause:** Bank not supported in production

**Fix:**
- Check Plaid's supported institutions: https://plaid.com/institutions/
- Some sandbox banks don't exist in production

### Transactions not syncing

**Cause:** API rate limits or bank issues

**Fix:**
- Wait a few minutes and try again
- Check Plaid Dashboard for errors
- Verify bank is online and accessible

---

## 💰 Plaid Pricing

### Free Tier:
- First 100 users: **Free**
- Great for personal use or small apps

### Paid Tiers:
- Starts at $0.50/user for Transactions API
- Volume discounts available
- Check current pricing: https://plaid.com/pricing/

### For Personal Use:
- You're likely within the free tier
- Track a few accounts for yourself = free
- Only pay if you exceed 100 connected items

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Plaid Production Guide](https://plaid.com/docs/production/)
- [Plaid Institutions](https://plaid.com/institutions/)
- [Plaid Support](https://support.plaid.com/)

---

## ✨ Summary Checklist

Before going to production:

- [ ] Request production access from Plaid
- [ ] Wait for approval email
- [ ] Copy production credentials from dashboard
- [ ] **Enable Transactions Refresh product** (https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products)
- [ ] Update `config.json` with production secret and env
- [ ] Restart the server
- [ ] Verify green "PRODUCTION" badge in UI
- [ ] Test linking a real bank account
- [ ] Sync and verify real transactions appear
- [ ] Test "Backfill All History" to verify full historical data access
- [ ] Set up HTTPS if deploying to internet
- [ ] Monitor API usage in Plaid Dashboard

---

**You're ready for production!** 🎉

Your expense tracker will now work with real bank accounts and real transaction data.

Commit message:

Document Transactions Refresh product requirement
Add comprehensive information about the asynchronous nature of Plaid's
transaction refresh process and expected timing for historical data.

Changes:
- Updated backfill startup message to mention 24-48 hour wait time
- Enhanced refresh success message to clarify async process
- Added 'Important Timing Note' section to PRODUCTION.md
- Added troubleshooting entry for 'same limited transactions' issue
- Explains that refresh is a background job taking 24-48 hours
- Provides step-by-step guide for progressive backfills
- Includes monitoring tips to track progress

This addresses user confusion when refresh succeeds (200 OK) but
historical data doesn't appear immediately.

PRODUCTION.md, after:

# Switching to Production Mode

This guide explains how to switch from Plaid's **Sandbox** (test data) to **Production** (real bank accounts).

## 📋 Prerequisites

Before switching to production, you need:

1. ✅ A Plaid account with **Production Access** approved
2. ✅ Production API credentials from Plaid
3. ✅ Your application tested thoroughly in Sandbox mode

---

## 🚦 Understanding Plaid Environments

Plaid has three environments:

### 1. **Sandbox** (Testing)
- ✅ Free, unlimited usage
- ✅ Fake banks and test credentials
- ✅ Instant setup, no approval needed
- ❌ No real bank connections
- **Best for:** Development and testing

### 2. **Development** (Limited Real Data)
- ✅ Connect real bank accounts
- ✅ Real transaction data
- ❌ Limited to 100 Items (bank connections)
- ❌ Requires Plaid approval
- **Best for:** Testing with real accounts before production

### 3. **Production** (Full Real Data)
- ✅ Unlimited real bank connections
- ✅ Full production features
- ❌ Requires Plaid compliance approval
- ❌ May have costs depending on usage
- **Best for:** Live application with real users

---

## 🔑 Step 1: Request Production Access from Plaid

### A. Go to Plaid Dashboard

1. Log in to https://dashboard.plaid.com
2. Go to **Team Settings** → **Keys**

### B. Request Production Access

1. You'll see a "Request Production Access" section at the top
2. Click **"Start Application"** or **"Request Production Access"**

### C. Complete the Application

You'll need to provide:

- **Company Information:**
  - Company name and website
  - Business description
  - Expected user volume

- **Use Case Details:**
  - How you'll use Plaid (expense tracking)
  - Which Plaid products (Transactions)
  - User consent and privacy policy

- **Security & Compliance:**
  - Data security measures
  - How you protect user data
  - Compliance with regulations

- **Technical Details:**
  - Your application URL (e.g., http://ha.ggg:3000)
  - OAuth redirect URIs
  - Webhook endpoints (optional)

### D. Wait for Approval

- ⏱️ Review typically takes **1-2 business days**
- 📧 You'll receive an email when approved
- ✅ Production credentials will appear in your dashboard

---

## 🔑 Step 2: Get Production Credentials

Once approved:

1. Go to **Team Settings** → **Keys** in Plaid Dashboard
2. You'll now see **three sets** of credentials:
   - Sandbox (yellow)
   - Development (blue)
   - Production (green) ✅

3. Copy your **Production** credentials:
   - `client_id` (same for all environments)
   - `production` secret (different from sandbox secret)

---

## 🔄 Step 2.5: Enable Transactions Refresh Product (Required for Full History)

**IMPORTANT:** To fetch full transaction history (7+ years for Amex, 2+ years for other banks), you need the **Transactions Refresh** product enabled.

### What is Transactions Refresh?

- The standard `Transactions` product only returns data **Plaid has already cached** (typically 90 days from when you first link an account)
- The `Transactions Refresh` product allows you to **trigger Plaid to fetch fresh historical data** from the institution
- Without it, you'll be limited to ~3 months of transactions, even when requesting older dates

### How to Enable Transactions Refresh

1. Go to https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products
2. Look for the **"Transactions"** product
3. Ensure **"Transactions Refresh"** is enabled
4. If you don't see this option or it's disabled:
   - Click **"Request Access"** or **"Enable"**
   - Contact Plaid Support if you can't enable it yourself
   - Some Plaid tiers may require an upgrade to access this feature

### What Happens Without Transactions Refresh?

If you don't have this product enabled:
- ❌ You'll see `INVALID_PRODUCT` errors when trying to backfill history
- ❌ The "Backfill All History" button will only return ~90 days of transactions
- ❌ You won't be able to fetch years of historical data from institutions
- ✅ You can still use the app, but with limited transaction history
- ✅ You can use the **Copilot CSV Import** feature as a workaround

### Verification

After enabling, you should be able to:
- Click "Backfill All History" without errors
- Fetch 7+ years of American Express transactions
- Fetch 2+ years of transactions from most other banks

**Important Timing Note:**
- The refresh process is **asynchronous** - Plaid fetches historical data in the background
- It can take **24-48 hours** (or longer) for full historical data to become available
- You may need to click "Backfill All History" multiple times over several days
- Each time you run backfill, check if more historical transactions have appeared

---

## ⚙️ Step 3: Update Your Configuration

### Option A: Update config.json (Recommended)

Edit your `config.json` file:

```json
{
  "google_sheet_id": "your-sheet-id",
  "plaid_client_id": "your-plaid-client-id",
  "plaid_secret": "your-PRODUCTION-secret-here",
  "plaid_env": "production"
}
```

**Important Changes:**
- Change `plaid_secret` to your **production** secret
- Change `plaid_env` from `"sandbox"` to `"production"`

### Option B: Use Environment Variables

Set these environment variables:

```bash
export PLAID_CLIENT_ID="your-plaid-client-id"
export PLAID_SECRET="your-production-secret"
export PLAID_ENV="production"
```

---

## 🔄 Step 4: Restart the Server

After updating the configuration:

```bash
# Stop the current server (Ctrl+C)

# Start it again
npm start
```

The server will now use **production** mode!

---

## ✅ Step 5: Verify Production Mode

### In the Web UI:

1. Open http://localhost:3000
2. Look at the sidebar footer
3. You should see: **Environment: PRODUCTION** (green badge)
4. If you see **SANDBOX** (yellow badge), check your config

### Test a Real Bank Connection:

1. Click **"Link Account"** in the UI
2. Click **"Link Bank Account"**
3. Search for **your real bank** (e.g., "Chase", "Bank of America")
4. Use your **real online banking credentials**
5. Complete the authentication flow

✅ Your real account should now be connected!

---

## 🧪 Step 6: Test Production Sync

### Sync Transactions:

1. In the dashboard, click **"Sync Transactions"** button
2. Wait for the sync to complete
3. You should see **real transactions** from your bank account

### Verify Data:

1. Go to **Transactions** page
2. You should see your real purchases, income, etc.
3. Check **Accounts** page for accurate balances
4. Open your Google Sheet to verify data is saved

---

## 🔒 Security Best Practices for Production

### 1. Protect Your Secrets

❌ **NEVER** commit `config.json` to git (already in `.gitignore`)

```bash
# Verify it's ignored:
git status

# Should NOT show config.json
```

### 2. Use HTTPS in Production

When deploying to a server (not localhost):

- Use HTTPS (not HTTP)
- Get SSL certificate (Let's Encrypt is free)
- Update Plaid redirect URIs to https://

### 3. Set Up Webhooks (Optional but Recommended)

Plaid can notify you when:
- A user needs to re-authenticate
- An account has errors
- New transactions are available

Set up in: **Plaid Dashboard** → **Webhooks**

### 4. Monitor API Usage

- Check **Plaid Dashboard** → **Activity** regularly
- Set up usage alerts
- Review API errors and fix issues

### 5. Handle Re-authentication

Banks sometimes require users to re-login. Implement:
- Error handling for `ITEM_LOGIN_REQUIRED`
- UI to prompt users to re-link
- Use Plaid Link in "update mode"

---

## 🔄 Switching Back to Sandbox

To switch back to testing mode:

### Edit config.json:

```json
{
  "plaid_env": "sandbox",
  "plaid_secret": "your-sandbox-secret"
}
```

### Restart server:

```bash
npm start
```

---

## 🆘 Troubleshooting Production Issues

### "INVALID_PRODUCT: client is not authorized to access transactions_refresh" error

**Cause:** Your Plaid account doesn't have the Transactions Refresh product enabled

**Fix:**
1. Go to https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products
2. Enable **"Transactions Refresh"** under the Transactions product
3. If you can't enable it, click "Request Access" or contact Plaid Support
4. Wait for approval (usually instant if your account tier supports it)
5. The "Backfill All History" button will then work to fetch full historical data

**Workaround if unavailable:**
- Use the **Copilot CSV Import** feature to import historical transactions
- Export data from your bank/credit card website and import via the app

### Backfill returns same limited transactions even after running refresh

**Cause:** Plaid's refresh process is asynchronous and can take 24-48 hours to complete

**Why this happens:**
- When you run "Backfill All History", it triggers `/transactions/refresh` which tells Plaid to start fetching historical data
- This is a **background job** that doesn't complete immediately
- Plaid gradually pulls historical data from the institution over hours or days
- The `/transactions/get` endpoint only returns data Plaid has already fetched

**Fix:**
1. Run "Backfill All History" to trigger the refresh (you've already done this)
2. **Wait 24-48 hours** for Plaid to fetch historical data in the background
3. Run "Backfill All History" again tomorrow to check for new transactions
4. Repeat every 24 hours until you see all historical data
5. For 7+ years of Amex history, this may take 2-3 days of progressive backfills

**How to monitor progress:**
- Check the console logs for "Transaction date range" each time you run backfill
- If the oldest date gets progressively older, Plaid is working in the background
- If it stays the same for 3+ days, you may have hit the institution's limit

### "Invalid credentials" error

**Cause:** Using sandbox secret in production mode

**Fix:**
- Copy the **production** secret from Plaid Dashboard
- Update `config.json` with production secret
- Restart server

### "Item login required" error

**Cause:** Bank requires re-authentication

**Fix:**
- Ask user to re-link their account
- Use Plaid Link in update mode (advanced)

### "Institution not available" error

**Cause:** Bank not supported in production

**Fix:**
- Check Plaid's supported institutions: https://plaid.com/institutions/
- Some sandbox banks don't exist in production

### Transactions not syncing

**Cause:** API rate limits or bank issues

**Fix:**
- Wait a few minutes and try again
- Check Plaid Dashboard for errors
- Verify bank is online and accessible

---

## 💰 Plaid Pricing

### Free Tier:
- First 100 users: **Free**
- Great for personal use or small apps

### Paid Tiers:
- Starts at $0.50/user for Transactions API
- Volume discounts available
- Check current pricing: https://plaid.com/pricing/

### For Personal Use:
- You're likely within the free tier
- Track a few accounts for yourself = free
- Only pay if you exceed 100 connected items

---

## 📚 Additional Resources

- [Plaid Production Guide](https://plaid.com/docs/production/)
- [Plaid Institutions](https://plaid.com/institutions/)
- [Plaid Support](https://support.plaid.com/)

---

## ✨ Summary Checklist

Before going to production:

- [ ] Request production access from Plaid
- [ ] Wait for approval email
- [ ] Copy production credentials from dashboard
- [ ] **Enable Transactions Refresh product** (https://dashboard.plaid.com/settings/team/products)
- [ ] Update `config.json` with production secret and env
- [ ] Restart the server
- [ ] Verify green "PRODUCTION" badge in UI
- [ ] Test linking a real bank account
- [ ] Sync and verify real transactions appear
- [ ] Test "Backfill All History" to verify full historical data access
- [ ] Set up HTTPS if deploying to internet
- [ ] Monitor API usage in Plaid Dashboard

---

**You're ready for production!** 🎉

Your expense tracker will now work with real bank accounts and real transaction data.
