docs/AI_SETUP_GUIDE.md, before:

# AI Categorization Setup Guide

## Overview

The expense tracker now includes AI-powered transaction categorization! By default, it uses an enhanced rule-based system, but you can enable local AI for even better accuracy.

## Quick Start (No AI Model)

The system works out of the box with:
- ✅ **Merchant pattern matching** - Learns from your categorization history
- ✅ **Rule-based categorization** - Uses smart keywords and patterns
- ✅ **90% accuracy** for common merchants

No setup required! Just start using the app.

## Enable Local AI (Optional)

For the best experience with 95%+ accuracy, enable local AI using Ollama:

### Step 1: Install Ollama

#### Mac
```bash
brew install ollama
```

#### Linux
```bash
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
```

#### Windows
Download from: https://ollama.com/download

### Step 2: Start Ollama Server

```bash
ollama serve
```

Leave this running in a terminal window.

### Step 3: Pull the Phi-3 Mini Model

In a new terminal:
```bash
ollama pull phi3:mini
```

This downloads ~2.3GB (one-time download).

### Step 4: Verify Setup

The app will automatically detect Ollama and show:
- **✓ AI Ready (phi3:mini)** - AI is enabled
- **Using Enhanced rule-based categorization** - Using fallback system

### Step 5: Use AI Categorization

1. Go to the **Transactions** page
2. Click the **🤖 AI Categorize** button
3. Confirm to categorize all uncategorized transactions

## How It Works

### Hybrid Approach

The system uses a **three-tier categorization** approach:

1. **Fast Path** (< 1ms)
   - Check merchant mappings you've created
   - Use exact pattern matches

2. **Medium Path** (< 5ms)
   - Apply rule-based keyword matching
   - Use common merchant patterns

3. **AI Path** (300-800ms)
   - Use local Phi-3 model for complex cases
   - Context-aware categorization
   - Handles typos and variations

### Learning System

The AI **learns from your corrections**:
- When you change a category, it remembers the merchant
- Future transactions from that merchant use your preference
- No need to manually create rules

## Features

### Auto-Categorize
- Click **🤖 AI Categorize** to categorize all uncategorized transactions
- Only updates transactions with 70%+ confidence
- Safe to run multiple times

### AI Suggestions
- Get category suggestions for individual transactions
- See confidence scores and reasoning
- Apply or ignore suggestions

### Status Indicator
- Shows whether AI is available or using fallback
- Updates automatically when Ollama starts/stops

## Performance

### Without Ollama (Enhanced Rules)
- Speed: < 5ms per transaction
- Accuracy: 85-90% for known merchants
- Memory: < 50MB

### With Ollama (AI)
- Speed: 300-800ms per transaction (first time)
- Accuracy: 95%+ with learning
- Memory: ~2.5GB (Ollama + model)
- Batch processing: 10 transactions in ~3 seconds

## Troubleshooting

### "Using Enhanced rule-based categorization"

This means Ollama is not detected. Check:
1. Is Ollama installed? Run: `which ollama`
2. Is Ollama running? Run: `ollama serve`
3. Is the model downloaded? Run: `ollama list`

### "Phi-3 model not found"

Download the model:
```bash
ollama pull phi3:mini
```

### Slow categorization

- First categorization is slower (model loading)
- Subsequent categorizations are faster
- Use batch processing for multiple transactions

### Wrong categories

The AI learns from you:
1. Change the category to the correct one
2. The system automatically learns this preference
3. Future transactions will use your preference

## Environment Variables

You can customize the AI service:

```bash
# .env file
OLLAMA_URL=http://localhost:11434  # Default
OLLAMA_MODEL=phi3:mini             # Default
```

### Use a Different Model

If you prefer a different model:

```bash
# Faster, less accurate
ollama pull llama3.2:1b
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b

# Slower, more accurate
ollama pull mistral:7b-instruct-q4_0
OLLAMA_MODEL=mistral:7b-instruct-q4_0
```

## API Endpoints

For developers building integrations:

### Get AI Status
```javascript
GET /api/ai/status
```

### Categorize Single Transaction
```javascript
POST /api/ai/categorize
{
  "transaction": {
    "description": "AMZN Mktp US",
    "merchant_name": "Amazon",
    "amount": -45.99
  }
}
```

### Batch Categorize
```javascript
POST /api/ai/categorize/batch
{
  "transactions": [...],
  "options": { "batchSize": 10 }
}
```

### Auto-Categorize All
```javascript
POST /api/ai/auto-categorize
{
  "onlyUncategorized": true,
  "updateDatabase": true
}
```

### Learn from Correction
```javascript
POST /api/ai/learn
{
  "transaction": {...},
  "userCategory": "Groceries"
}
```

## FAQ

**Q: Do I need to install Ollama?**
A: No! The system works great without it using enhanced rules.

**Q: Is my data sent to the internet?**
A: No. Everything runs locally. Your data never leaves your machine.

**Q: Will this slow down my app?**
A: No. AI categorization is optional and runs in the background.

**Q: Can I use a different AI model?**
A: Yes! Set `OLLAMA_MODEL` to any model Ollama supports.

**Q: How much disk space does this use?**
A: Phi-3 Mini: ~2.3GB. You can delete it anytime with `ollama rm phi3:mini`.

**Q: Does it work offline?**
A: Yes! Once the model is downloaded, everything runs offline.

## Next Steps

1. Start using the app with the built-in rule system
2. Install Ollama when you want better accuracy
3. Let the system learn from your corrections
4. Enjoy automated categorization!

## Support

For issues or questions:
- Check the [AI_CATEGORIZATION_OPTIONS.md](./AI_CATEGORIZATION_OPTIONS.md) for technical details
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check Ollama docs: https://ollama.com/docs

Commit message:

Add automatic Ollama startup on server start
Enhanced the AI categorization service to automatically start Ollama
when the server starts if it's not already running:

- Checks if Ollama is installed on the system (using 'which ollama')
- Automatically spawns 'ollama serve' in background if installed
- Detached process that doesn't block server startup
- Waits 3 seconds and retries connection check
- Provides helpful installation instructions if not installed
- Falls back gracefully to enhanced rule-based categorization

User experience improvements:
- No manual Ollama startup required
- Server handles it automatically
- Clear console messages about Ollama status
- Installation instructions displayed when needed

Updated AI_SETUP_GUIDE.md to reflect automatic startup feature.

docs/AI_SETUP_GUIDE.md, after:

# AI Categorization Setup Guide

## Overview

The expense tracker now includes AI-powered transaction categorization! By default, it uses an enhanced rule-based system, but you can enable local AI for even better accuracy.

## Quick Start (No AI Model)

The system works out of the box with:
- ✅ **Merchant pattern matching** - Learns from your categorization history
- ✅ **Rule-based categorization** - Uses smart keywords and patterns
- ✅ **90% accuracy** for common merchants

No setup required! Just start using the app.

## Enable Local AI (Optional)

For the best experience with 95%+ accuracy, enable local AI using Ollama:

### Step 1: Install Ollama

#### Mac
```bash
brew install ollama
```

#### Linux
```bash
curl -fsSL https://ollama.com/install.sh | sh
```

#### Windows
Download from: https://ollama.com/download

### Step 2: Start Ollama Server (Automatic!)

**The server automatically starts Ollama for you!** 🎉

When you start the expense tracker server, it will:
1. Check if Ollama is installed
2. Automatically start Ollama if it's not running
3. Wait a few seconds for it to be ready

You can also start it manually if needed:
```bash
ollama serve
```

### Step 3: Pull the Phi-3 Mini Model

In a new terminal:
```bash
ollama pull phi3:mini
```

This downloads ~2.3GB (one-time download).

### Step 4: Verify Setup

The app will automatically detect Ollama and show:
- **✓ AI Ready (phi3:mini)** - AI is enabled
- **Using Enhanced rule-based categorization** - Using fallback system

### Step 5: Use AI Categorization

1. Go to the **Transactions** page
2. Click the **🤖 AI Categorize** button
3. Confirm to categorize all uncategorized transactions

## How It Works

### Hybrid Approach

The system uses a **three-tier categorization** approach:

1. **Fast Path** (< 1ms)
   - Check merchant mappings you've created
   - Use exact pattern matches

2. **Medium Path** (< 5ms)
   - Apply rule-based keyword matching
   - Use common merchant patterns

3. **AI Path** (300-800ms)
   - Use local Phi-3 model for complex cases
   - Context-aware categorization
   - Handles typos and variations

### Learning System

The AI **learns from your corrections**:
- When you change a category, it remembers the merchant
- Future transactions from that merchant use your preference
- No need to manually create rules

## Features

### Auto-Categorize
- Click **🤖 AI Categorize** to categorize all uncategorized transactions
- Only updates transactions with 70%+ confidence
- Safe to run multiple times

### AI Suggestions
- Get category suggestions for individual transactions
- See confidence scores and reasoning
- Apply or ignore suggestions

### Status Indicator
- Shows whether AI is available or using fallback
- Updates automatically when Ollama starts/stops

## Performance

### Without Ollama (Enhanced Rules)
- Speed: < 5ms per transaction
- Accuracy: 85-90% for known merchants
- Memory: < 50MB

### With Ollama (AI)
- Speed: 300-800ms per transaction (first time)
- Accuracy: 95%+ with learning
- Memory: ~2.5GB (Ollama + model)
- Batch processing: 10 transactions in ~3 seconds

## Troubleshooting

### "Using Enhanced rule-based categorization"

This means Ollama is not detected. Check:
1. Is Ollama installed? Run: `which ollama`
2. Is Ollama running? Run: `ollama serve`
3. Is the model downloaded? Run: `ollama list`

### "Phi-3 model not found"

Download the model:
```bash
ollama pull phi3:mini
```

### Slow categorization

- First categorization is slower (model loading)
- Subsequent categorizations are faster
- Use batch processing for multiple transactions

### Wrong categories

The AI learns from you:
1. Change the category to the correct one
2. The system automatically learns this preference
3. Future transactions will use your preference

## Environment Variables

You can customize the AI service:

```bash
# .env file
OLLAMA_URL=http://localhost:11434  # Default
OLLAMA_MODEL=phi3:mini             # Default
```

### Use a Different Model

If you prefer a different model:

```bash
# Faster, less accurate
ollama pull llama3.2:1b
OLLAMA_MODEL=llama3.2:1b

# Slower, more accurate
ollama pull mistral:7b-instruct-q4_0
OLLAMA_MODEL=mistral:7b-instruct-q4_0
```

## API Endpoints

For developers building integrations:

### Get AI Status
```javascript
GET /api/ai/status
```

### Categorize Single Transaction
```javascript
POST /api/ai/categorize
{
  "transaction": {
    "description": "AMZN Mktp US",
    "merchant_name": "Amazon",
    "amount": -45.99
  }
}
```

### Batch Categorize
```javascript
POST /api/ai/categorize/batch
{
  "transactions": [...],
  "options": { "batchSize": 10 }
}
```

### Auto-Categorize All
```javascript
POST /api/ai/auto-categorize
{
  "onlyUncategorized": true,
  "updateDatabase": true
}
```

### Learn from Correction
```javascript
POST /api/ai/learn
{
  "transaction": {...},
  "userCategory": "Groceries"
}
```

## FAQ

**Q: Do I need to install Ollama?**
A: No! The system works great without it using enhanced rules.

**Q: Is my data sent to the internet?**
A: No. Everything runs locally. Your data never leaves your machine.

**Q: Will this slow down my app?**
A: No. AI categorization is optional and runs in the background.

**Q: Can I use a different AI model?**
A: Yes! Set `OLLAMA_MODEL` to any model Ollama supports.

**Q: How much disk space does this use?**
A: Phi-3 Mini: ~2.3GB. You can delete it anytime with `ollama rm phi3:mini`.

**Q: Does it work offline?**
A: Yes! Once the model is downloaded, everything runs offline.

## Next Steps

1. Start using the app with the built-in rule system
2. Install Ollama when you want better accuracy
3. Let the system learn from your corrections
4. Enjoy automated categorization!

## Support

For issues or questions:
- Check the [AI_CATEGORIZATION_OPTIONS.md](./AI_CATEGORIZATION_OPTIONS.md) for technical details
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Check Ollama docs: https://ollama.com/docs
